## Coefficient of Determination(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coefficient_of_determination)

 The coefficient of determination (denoted by R2) is a key output of regression analysis. It is interpreted as the proportion of the variance in the dependent variable that is predictable from the independent variable.

- The coefficient of determination is the square of the correlation (r) between predicted y scores and actual y scores; thus, it ranges from 0 to 1.
- With linear regression, the coefficient of determination is also equal to the square of the correlation between x and y scores.
- An R2 of 0 means that the dependent variable cannot be predicted from the independent variable.
- An R2 of 1 means the dependent variable can be predicted without error from the independent variable.
- An R2 between 0 and 1 indicates the extent to which the dependent variable is predictable. An R2 of 0.10 means that 10 percent of the variance in Y is predictable from X; an R2 of 0.20 means that 20 percent is predictable; and so on.

The formula for computing the coefficient of determination for a linear regression model with one independent variable is given below.

**Coefficient of determination.** The coefficient of determination (R2) for a linear regression model with one independent variable is:

$R^2 = \{ ( 1 / N ) * Σ [ (x_i - \bar{x}) * (y_i - \bar{y}) ] / (σ_x * σ_y ) \}^2$

where N is the number of observations used to fit the model, Σ is the summation symbol, $x_i$ is the x value for observation i, $\bar{x}$ is the mean x value, $y_i$ is the y value for observation i, $\bar{y}$ is the mean y value, $σ_x$ is the standard deviation of x, and $σ_y$ is the standard deviation of y. 